module: make CJS load from ESM loader (#47999)
nodejs/node: doc/api/esm.md

| ------------ | ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `'builtin'`  | Load a Node.js builtin module  | Not applicable                                                             |
| `'commonjs'` | Load a Node.js CommonJS module | { [`string`][], [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][], `null`, `undefined` } |
| `'json'`     | Load a JSON file               | { [`string`][], [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                      |
| `'module'`   | Load an ES module              | { [`string`][], [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                      |
| `'wasm'`     | Load a WebAssembly module      | { [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                                    |

The value of `source` is ignored for type `'builtin'` because currently it is
not possible to replace the value of a Node.js builtin (core) module. Unless a
non-nullish `source` is supplied for type `'commonjs'`, it will be fetched using
the CommonJS module loader. When non-nullish `source` is supplied for type
`'commonjs'`, `require` calls from inside the loaded module will call the

> `resolve` and `load` hooks.

Reviewer: Okay. What _is_ that behavior? 😀

> `resolve` and `load` hooks.

Author: `defaultLoad` returns `null` as a source when `format` is `'commonjs'`.

> `resolve` and `load` hooks.

Reviewer: > `defaultLoad` returns `null` as a source when `format` is `'commonjs'`.

So if someone is trying to use the return value of `next`, when `next` is `defaultLoad`, would get a `null` source? Shouldn’t they get the actual source content?

> `resolve` and `load` hooks.

Author: They'll get a `null` source, they would need to call `readFile(new URL(url))` to opt-in to the new behavior.

> not possible to replace the value of a Node.js builtin (core) module. Unless a
> non-nullish `source` is supplied for type `'commonjs'`, it will be fetched using
> the CommonJS module loader. When non-nullish `source` is supplied for type
> `'commonjs'`, `require` calls from inside the loaded module will call the
> `resolve` and `load` hooks.

Reviewer: Okay, how about:

```suggestion
not possible to replace the value of a Node.js builtin (core) module.

For type `'commonjs'`, if `source` is defined, `require` calls from inside the
loaded module will go through the registered `resolve` and `load` hooks.
If `source` is undefined or `null`, it will be handled by the CommonJS
module loader and not processed by any registered hooks. This behavior
for nullish `source` is temporary; in the future, a `source` value that is
undefined or `null` will not be supported.

The Node.js internal `defaultLoad`, which is the value of `next` for the last
loader in the `load` chain, does not return a value for `source`. If one is desired,
loader authors should load it via a call like `readFile(new URL(url))`. This may
also change once support for nullish `source` is discontinued.
```

| `'wasm'`     | Load a WebAssembly module      | { [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                                    |

The value of `source` is ignored for type `'builtin'` because currently it is
not possible to replace the value of a Node.js builtin (core) module.

For type `'commonjs'`, if `source` is defined, `require` calls from inside the
loaded module will go through the registered `resolve` and `load` hooks.
If `source` is undefined or `null`, it will be handled by the CommonJS
module loader and not processed by any registered hooks. This behavior
for nullish `source` is temporary; in the future, a `source` value that is
undefined or `null` will not be supported.

The Node.js own `load` implementation, which is the value of `next` for the last
loader in the `load` chain, returns `null` for `source` for backward
compatibility. Here is a example loader that would opt-in to using the behavior:

```js
import { readFile } from 'node:fs/promises';

export async function load(url, context, nextLoad) {
  const response = await nextLoad(url, context);
  if (response.format === 'commonjs') {

>     response.source ??= await readFile(new URL(response.responseURL ?? url));

Reviewer: I don’t see `responseURL` documented in the signature for `load`, don’t we need to add it?

The final value of `format` must be one of the following:

| `format`     | Description                    | Acceptable types for `source` returned by `load`                           |
| ------------ | ------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `'builtin'`  | Load a Node.js builtin module  | Not applicable                                                             |
| `'commonjs'` | Load a Node.js CommonJS module | { [`string`][], [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][], `null`, `undefined` } |
| `'json'`     | Load a JSON file               | { [`string`][], [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                      |
| `'module'`   | Load an ES module              | { [`string`][], [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                      |
| `'wasm'`     | Load a WebAssembly module      | { [`ArrayBuffer`][], [`TypedArray`][] }                                    |

The value of `source` is ignored for type `'builtin'` because currently it is
not possible to replace the value of a Node.js builtin (core) module.

> For type `'commonjs'`, if `source` is defined, `require` calls from inside the
> loaded module will go through the registered `resolve` and `load` hooks.
> If `source` is undefined or `null`, it will be handled by the CommonJS
> module loader and not processed by any registered hooks. This behavior
> for nullish `source` is temporary; in the future, a `source` value that is
> undefined or `null` will not be supported.

Reviewer 2: nit (the first bit reads a little yoda-esque), and I think it's worth specifically calling out CJSLoader won't be used and require.extensions won't apply.

```suggestion
If a `load` hook returns commonjs `source`, that module's `require` calls will
be processed by ESM loader with registered `resolve` and `load` hooks;
`require.extensions` and monkey-patching on the CommonJS module loader will not
apply. If `source` is undefined or `null`, it will be handled by the CommonJS
module loader and not processed by registered hooks. This behavior for nullish
`source` is temporary—in the future, nullish `source` will not be supported.
```

> If a `load` hook returns commonjs `source`, that module's `require` calls will
> be processed by ESM loader with registered `resolve` and `load` hooks;
> `require.extensions` and monkey-patching on the CommonJS module loader will not
> apply. If `source` is undefined or `null`, it will be handled by the CommonJS
> module loader and not processed by registered hooks. This behavior for nullish
> `source` is temporary—in the future, nullish `source` will not be supported.

Author: ```suggestion
The value of `source` can be omitted for type `'commonjs'`. When a `source` is
provided, all `require` calls from this module will be processed by the ESM
loader with registered `resolve` and `load` hooks; all `require.resolve` calls
from this module will be processed by the ESM loader with registered `resolve`
hooks; `require.extensions` and monkey-patching on the CommonJS module loader
will not apply. If `source` is undefined or `null`, it will be handled by the
CommonJS module loader and `require`/`require.resolve` calls will not go through
the registered hooks. This behavior for nullish `source` is temporary — in the
future, nullish `source` will not be supported.
```

> The Node.js own `load` implementation, which is the value of `next` for the last
> loader in the `load` chain, returns `null` for `source` for backward
> compatibility. Here is an example loader that would opt-in to using the
> non-default behavior:

Author: ```suggestion
The Node.js own `load` implementation, which is the value of `next` for the last
loader in the `load` chain, returns `null` for `source` when `format` is
`'commonjs'` for backward compatibility. Here is an example loader that would
opt-in to using the non-default behavior:
```

```js
import { readFile } from 'node:fs/promises';

export async function load(url, context, nextLoad) {

>   const response = await nextLoad(url, context);
>   if (response.format === 'commonjs') {
>     response.source ??= await readFile(new URL(response.responseURL ?? url));
>   }
>   return response;

Reviewer 2: nit: the rest of this doc refers to this as "result"

```suggestion
  const result = await nextLoad(url, context);
  if (result.format === 'commonjs') {
    result.source ??= await readFile(new URL(result.responseURL ?? url));
  }
  return result;
```
